well I'm very excited to introduce this
next session it's a panel discussion
between three extraordinary men Bishop
Robert Baron Dr Jordan Peterson and
father Mike schmidtz I know many of you
have been very much anticipating this
dialogue you've told us as much over the
last couple days first a few
introductions and I'll be very brief
because I want to give most of the time
uh to these three men First bishop Baron
I introduced him last night to you but
he's of course the bishop of the dicese
of Winona Chester in Minnesota he's also
the founder of w on fire Catholic
Ministries he's written dozens of
best-selling books he has been invited
to speak about religion at the
headquarters of Facebook Google and
Amazon and he has been described by
Arthur Brooks as arguably the greatest
Catholic Communicator of our time Dr
Jordan Peterson is a bestselling author
psychologist online educator and
professor ameritus of the unity
University of Toronto he has taught
mythology to lawyers doctors and
business people he's consulted uh for
the UN Secretary General and he's
lectured extensively throughout the
United States and Europe Jordan has
published over 100 scientific papers
transforming the modern understanding of
Personality his book maps of meaning
revolutionized the psychology of
religion I know many of you have read uh
his two more recent books both
bestsellers the first one is called 12
rules for life an antidote uh for two
chaos that was published in 2018 and has
sold 5 million copies and then he
published a sequel recently called
Beyond order 12 more rules for life
which was released in
2021 finally father Mike schmidtz is a
renowned Catholic priest and evangelist
well known for his YouTube videos on the
Ascension present Channel father Mike is
theost host of the breakout Bible in a
year podcast man' how many listeners to
that podcast do we have here lots of you
guys good very good that became not only
the number one Catholic podcast in the
world but for many weeks I think for
several months it was the number one
podcast in the world period among any
genre among any podcast
producer father Mike is currently
wrapping up a sequel podcast called
catechism in a year where he's walking
people through the catechism of the
Catholic Church see we got a lot of
listeners to that one as well very good
and he serves as the Director of Youth
and Young Adult Ministry for the dicese
of duth also in Minnesota seems to be a
Powerhouse state of
evangelization and he's the chaplain for
the Newman Center at the University of
Minnesota duth in addition to these
three men we also are are blessed to
have as a moderator Dr Matthew petrusic
Matthew is the senior director of the
word on fire Institute and it's
professor of Catholic ethics Matthew has
edited or authored several books
including evangelization and ideology
and very relevant to this discussion he
co-authored a book titled Jordan
Peterson God and Christianity the search
for a meaningful life which I believe
everyone here received a copy of that
book as a part of your registration
Matthew lectures broadly in English and
Spanish on moral philosophy theology
politics
social issues in the Catholic
intellectual tradition well as I prepare
to welcome these men to the stage one
final thing that really strikes me about
all three of our panelists is that I
don't think anyone in the world has done
more than these three men to open up the
Bible in fresh and exciting ways
especially for young people Bishop Baron
of course is a world-renowned preacher
his Sunday homilies are heard by
hundreds of thousands of people he also
launched the word on fire Bible series
which is presenting the Bible with
beautiful art and genius ancient
commentary and it's become the
best-selling Catholic Bible of Our
Generation Dr Peterson especially
through his biblical lectures on Genesis
and Exodus has led a whole generation of
young people to become infatuated with
these ancient texts most of them for the
first time and then father Mike schmidtz
through his Bible in a year podcast has
helped millions of people go through the
entire Bible cover to cover many of them
for the first time these I think are the
three great Proclaimers of the word
today and I invite you to join me in
welcoming to the stage Bishop Robert
Baron Dr Jordan Peterson and father Mike
schmidtz thanks
everybody
well thank you Brandon for that very
generous introduction I would like to
get right to it we'll Begin by asking
each one of you a specific question
related to the work that you've been
doing and then I'll ask some general
questions and I invite you all to
respond to each other as we move through
the questions so first question for you
Dr Peterson Christians understand Jesus
in ways that are consonant with your
Works symbolic depictions of Christ for
example as the archetypal King of Kings
responsible bearer of cosmic suffering
and practical guide to avoiding temporal
hell however we Christians additionally
see Jesus as the historically real lord
the myth in the language of CS Lewis who
became fact the God man who was
crucified died for our sins and was
raised on the third day so my question
Dr Peterson how do you relate your own
conception of the Christ to this
Orthodox little o Orthodox Christian
conception well I think this I really
think that the CS Lewis formulation
which
is rather traditional formulation and
also a formulation that was accepted by
Yung by the way I think it's the
simplest explanation you know i' I've
been writing a new book which is a
strange thing to say because it's by no
means simple I've been writing a new
book called we who wrestle with God and
it's a it's a continuation of the work I
started to
do diving into and attempting to
understand the Genesis narratives and
The Exodus narratives I've included a
lot more books the abrahamic story um
for example the story of Jonah the story
of Job um other major biblical texts I'm
working on the
gospel U section at the moment probably
mostly utilizing the the gospel of
Matthew and Christ's claim essentially
is that he was the Incarnation of the
prophet and the laws and that makes that
that's a very specific sort of claim and
so what it means is something
like it's an analog it's analogous to
the idea of the king of kings and so you
could imagine organizing
people in groups of 10 you might ask
those 10 people to elect from among
themselves the most noteworthy of the 10
people then you could imagine having the
10 the people who were nominated get
together and getting to know each other
and then nominate the most worthy of
them from that group and you could do
that all the way up to the most
noteworthy possible per person of all
the persons that ever lived and that
would be the person who would most
closely approximate the spirit of the
king of kings so to would most closely
approximate the notion of kingship
itself whatever that is and Christ
claimed that true kingship was embodied
in the law and the prophets and the law
of course is the tradition that that had
been extracted from human interaction
over endless Millennia not least the
period of time that's covered by the
biblical stories and then the prophets
are the manifestation of the spirit that
generates the law right because the law
is something that has to be in extracted
from tradition let's say instantiated
but also updated so you need a a a a
static element of the spirit that should
guide us that would be the law and you
need a dynamic element and that would be
the prophets and then you could think
that the combination of those two things
would be an even more Transcendent
spirit and then you could imagine that
you could be guided by that Spirit which
is what you would do if you were a
follower of the law but then you could
imagine doing what Christ told the
Pharisees to do which would be to embody
more than merely the Dogma but also the
spirit and then you could imagine that
you could open yourself up so that that
Spirit possessed you fully that's a good
way of thinking about it and that's what
Christ claimed he was
and that seems right like and now I have
to say along with that that I don't
understand what that means but I don't
well well I don't understand it and this
is something I think this is part of the
reason why the religious tradition and
the scientific tradition Clash you know
because the Christian claim is that
Christ defeated death let's say and
overcame hell and obviously one of the
objections to that is that there's quite
a lot of death still around and no
shortage of hell and so it's not an easy
thing to understand what it means that
that's defeated and you could
say I listened to this young man in
Canada recently Josh Alexander who's
been persecuted quite remarkably for
being a forthright Catholic in Canada
because that's where we're at in Canada
by the way um he got kicked out of his
Catholic school for making the claim I
think he cited a gospel line from Mark
pointing out that there are men and
women and that was unacceptable to his
teachers and and and the administrative
staff at the Catholic school so they
gave him in the boot despite the fact
that he was 16 and he was just
interviewed I interviewed him I haven't
released that yet but also my wife and
he said that one of the things that gave
him strength was the notion that good
has already won you know and that's a
very sophisticated idea for a young man
and he's very forthright and solid
character and what he meant was
something like in the space of Eternity
good constantly triumphs over evil and
that the sacrifice of Christ is the
pattern of what made that possible and
that's seems to me to be correct but we
still have to what what do we do we
still have to engage in the battle in
our time in the present and so that this
can be true in eternity and be in
process in the present and I think
that's I I think that's also correct I
mean we have to conceptualize eternity
in some manner because we are related to
it just like we're related to the
infinite and yet we're constrained in
the present and in the finite and
there's a tension between those and one
of the errors I think that religious
people make and I think this is more on
the Protestant side of things although
Catholics aren't immune to it is that is
to announce that if you know if you
merely believe that Christ defeated evil
that
somehow culminates in your complete
salvation and that strikes me as highly
improbable given that we also have a
fair bit of work to do and that the work
itself is also relevant and so anyways
as I've been working through these ideas
the simplest explanation for me has
emerged that the claim that Christ made
is the simplest explanation
for it's the simplest explanation
historically and narratively but that's
bounded by the fact that even if it's
true even though it's true we might say
that doesn't mean we understand exactly
what it means that doesn't bother me so
much because even if we accept
scientific explanations let's say
materialist reductionist explanations
for the structure of existence we still
end up with Unsolved Mysteries like
scientists have no idea what happened to
initiate the big bang for example or
even if the Big Bang happens to be true
we have no idea how DNA involved we
don't know how life came about like
there's Mysteries everywhere and the
fact that there's still some mystery
left at the bottom of our religious
preconceptions well it's a bother
because we'd rather know but the fact
that we don't doesn't invalidate the
whole system of belief
so
thank you Dr ferson Bishop B of father
Mike could first of all M applaud your
Catholic sensibility there where we
believe the victory has been won so
that's what the cross would symbolize so
what you've said I think very eloquently
about the cross right every possible
permutation and combination of human
misery and failure and negativity is
contained here in the cross of Jesus the
resurrection signals that God's mercy in
God's love is more powerful than any of
that so that's why we really do know the
victory has been won but then when you
read someone like Paul when he says Yus
curios Jesus is Lord that's a
counterpart to Kaiser curios which they
would have said at the time Caesar's
Lord get into his army and Paul's saying
no no Yus was curious Jesus is the Lord
get into his army so the idea is we know
the victory's been won it's like the the
Normandy invasion right the Norman
Invasion World War II was effectively
over that day yet there was still a lot
of work to be done before the war was
definitively over same with with now
until the end of time the battle's been
won on the cross but now we have the
privilege of getting in the army of the
of the crucified and Risen Lord and to
you know do the mop-up work so what why
do you if you don't mind no go ahead why
see one of the problems I have in
understanding that I guess is that why
do you think there is how do you
conceptualize the the simultaneous fact
of let's say the Eternal Victory with
the proximal necessity of undertaking
the fight in in in the domain of finite
time let's say in each of our lives like
how do you how do
you mediate that Paradox in a way we've
been given the privilege of entering
into that
struggle so it's been won by Christ it's
won by God in Christ on the cross and
through the resurrection and now we're
given the privilege of getting in the
Army and and contributing to increasing
good in the world and battling evil and
we do it with a kind of panach and
confidence because we know the
definitive battle has been one so I
think it's God it as you think that's
the abrahamic adventure is that the same
thing yeah I mean what begins with
Israel comes to a kind of climax through
the cross and resurrection and now we're
in the last Act of a a five act play I
would say creation followed by the Fall
followed by Israel so God's rescue
operation Israel coming to its climax in
the coming of the mashiach and now Act
five we're in which is the mop-up work
now we join the army of the mashiach and
then we do our bit to increase good and
decrease evil you know so we have to
know what part of the play we're in
that's very important we're in Act five
but the previous four acts have to be
understood clearly or we won't know what
we're doing in Act
five if I could uh just add one more
thing is that
what
I just but along those along those lines
of like why I love that's a great great
question why why not when Jesus dies
rises from the dead ascends to Heaven
it's over or Eden again and I think part
of it goes back to if you go back to the
very first chapters of Genesis where
human beings are created in God's image
and likeness and that means
something not only does it mean that we
have an intellect and a will that only
that not only means we're free also
means there's a there's a there's an end
there's a there's a thing God wants us
to become yeah Jesus makes that
possible and so now we get to become so
I I I think that you know this this
great Revelation in Christianity one of
the many is that God is our father that
is he's personal he's our father and he
doesn't want a bunch of pets he wants
children who are like him and we can
only become like him if we
endure all the trials and yet still say
I trust you so think we have something
difficult and important to do and that
that's necessary have to right right so
that's part of the adventure or the
privilege part of that story that's the
privilege of yeah that yeah fair enough
yeah M let me Sol that one
huh I I just checked that off that's
right what else you got
there what else fall and Redemption
check okay fall Redemption got
it Bishop Baron one of the great
Hallmarks of your Evangelical work has
been to respond to the cultures
suspicion of morality and Truth by
choosing to lead with beauty while this
approach has been fruitful there are
still many who insist that beauty is not
only subjective but the most subjective
of the three transcendentals the good
the true and the Beautiful so how can
Catholics make a case for the
objectivity of Beauty in a culture a
wash with relativism and one that even
seems to celebrate ugliness yeah no I
get all that um and as you know I've
said in our postmodern culture there's
such skepticism about the true and the
good you know here's what you should
know here's how you should act so I
suggested start with the third
transcendal of the beautiful which just
look look at this beautiful thing and
let it draw you into its power but on
the subjectivism thing to me the
beautiful is just as objective as the
true and the good when you see okay 2+ 2
equals 4 and you understand that
relationship and you get it that has a
power over you that has an objective
hold on you that's self-evident seems to
me or like when you say here's what
maxan col did at alitz and you say by
God that was morally praiseworthy that
that's something morally right it's
never a matter of like your private
opinion like you I'm really fond of
Maxine Co I think he's great but maybe
you don't and that's you know up to you
no it has a it has a power over you it
rearranges your subjectivity and I think
the beautiful is exactly the same thing
the truly beautiful not just the pretty
or the subjectively satisfying but the
truly beautiful you know the cysteine
ceiling or Beethoven 7 Symphony or
something that how like how impossibly
trivial it would be to say listen to
Beethoven 7 Symphony and say I don't
like it you know it's not really my cup
of tea see and your your laughter gives
away the game that that's the point that
there's something so
objectively uh powerful about that that
it rearranges you you don't sit in
judgment on the beautiful it judges you
um so that's why I I would resist any
attempt to subjectivized the beautiful
it has the same status as the other two
transcendentals and then it leads you as
the other two do toward the source right
so you see this is as old as Plato and
it comes right through the Western
tradition that you see the beautiful
object or person or face and then it
leads you by a steady progress The Plato
right outward outward outward to higher
higher forms of beauty arranged
hierarchically until you come he says in
that beautiful image to the Open Sea of
the beautiful itself well that's a deep
Instinct in the west right but if you
subjectivized the beautiful that whole
project will not get underway but when
the the truly beautiful grabs you it
starts leading you on this journey
upward and outward toward God I would
say the Horizon of all Beauty um so
that's why I use it not just
decoratively like wasn't that a pretty
decoration to evangelization I use it as
an essential feature of evangelization
it's why things like Gothic Cathedrals
when I was a I was a kid I was 29 when I
went to Paris and began my studies and
when I went to notredam for the first
time and it was the rose window as a
yungi and you know you'd appreciate the
I all of the archetypal quality the
mandalic quality of that but what was it
about that Rose window that just sent me
on this adventure and I talk about Rose
windows and gothic church which is all
the time to this day is because the
platonic thing kicked in I I saw this
beautiful thing and it sent me on this
trajectory so that's why I think it's
every bit as objective as the as the
good and the true I
wonder three things about that quickly
one is that I think beauty is a burning
bush right it's something that calls to
us and it's something out of which God
can speak okay the next thing is maybe
we shouldn't use objective maybe we
should use Transcendent because I think
part of the reason that people object to
that is because obviously beauty isn't
as easy to characterize as the existence
of a simple material object right so but
but having so we could say Transcendent
which takes it out of the realm of the
subjective and still points upward but
then I'll make a counter proposition to
that I I I did a paper at Harvard with a
couple of my students we we produced a a
a measurement device a questionnaire as
as it happens to assess people's
lifetime creative production and and
then we wanted to look at the
relationship between various personality
traits and their intelligence and their
creative ability in relationship to
their lifetime creative production and
in in one of the steps we had people
make a collage out of a collage kit and
then we had artists rate the collage for
its aesthetic quality and see if you do
that so imagine you have multiple people
rating the same production for beauty
then you can calculate how tightly
related the the uh the the ratings are
if if there's something that you could
identify reliably as Beauty then a um a
collage that one artist rated as
beautiful would be much more likely to
be rated by the other artists as
beautiful and vice versa the ugly ones
would fall to the bottom and the
interrater reliability across the be
judgments of beauty was extremely high
and so it you know it's not as high as
you might say if you asked a bunch of
people is that that black or white but
but it was high enough so that you could
extract out a single Factor across the
Productions that you could call Beauty
and so you could imagine that beauty is
a category that has fairly wide
boundaries but that doesn't mean there
isn't anything Central to it and then
your claim is that it points upward
which I think is exactly right and that
goes back to AC quaintance you know who
says the beautiful come is what happens
when integritas consonancia and claritas
come together wholeness Harmony and
radiance when those three things come
together and I always think for some
reason of sports examples of whether
it's a beautiful golf swing or I think
when someone makes a great catch you
know in football you say hey beautiful
what a beautiful catch and someone let's
say not experienced with football would
say I don't get it why do you think
that's beautiful well let me explain it
to you and if CLS is right and James
Joyce thought he was because this is
right in the at the heart of a portrait
of the artist is that you're noticing
those three things you're noticing
integritas there's a wholeness to it
you're noticing consono which is all the
elements come together harmoniously in
it think of like like a Rory maoy golf
swing compared to mine is very
interesting cuz his it's it's like every
element of the Swing comes together with
great uh Harmony mine doesn't mine is
this Herky jerky and off you know so
there's a hierarchical purpose in the
swing then too it towards the end and
then that the last one is very cool
because it's claras which literally
means brightness and in some texts
aquinus even suggests physical
brightness like what a beautiful watch
because it's shining you know but then
what becomes clear in the tradition is
what he really means is the claritas for
the the clarity of form it's the
Splendor of form so you you notice the
Concord right the consonancia and then
it sings to you it's the it's the
Splendor of the form that makes you say
ah beautiful right something that that
would be something that would compel awe
and imitation and and you could argue I
would tend to agree with this that it's
the first of the transends for that
reason because first being has to get
your attention and only then can you
reflect on it as good and true right but
it first has to get your attention you
say ah beautiful then you move to the
good and the true um so that's where how
coinus accounts for the objectivity
those three elements have to be present
so what would what would
subjectively subjectively pretty art
look like or the opposite of
transcendent would that be imminent in
this case or would how would you make
that because we have objective truth and
subjective truth that makes that's clear
distinction what be the opposite of
non-trc beauty maybe something that this
is Diet Von hillerbrand that only
appeals to your kind of emotional state
of mind it's what he would call
subjectively satisfying as opposed to
objectively valuable to it too well you
you that might be akin to those sorts of
pop music pieces that you capture
instantly but you can only listen to
like three times and you're done with
them compared to some well there's lots
of music like that compared to something
like like a b piece for example that you
might bounce off on First Contact
because it's very sophisticated but with
repeated listens you can delve into it
and then it's inexhaustible right right
so and there so the question is akin to
something like what's the difference
between something that's shallow and
beautiful you know or pretty and
something that's deep and beautiful I
would say too if something's deep it
moves you in more Dimensions
simultaneously right that's like a
definition of deep and a deep story has
multiple meanings and not just so it's
something shallow and beautiful is
exhaustible in its beauty and something
deep and beautiful isn't it's
inexhaustable rearranges your
Consciousness right right I maybe some
of I wrote about this many years ago but
there was an article in Rolling Stone
magazine many years ago and they asked
rockers what was the first song that
rocked your world and it was a cool way
to State the question it wasn't what's
the first song you liked it was what's
the first song that that changed you
right and I knew right away what my
answer was mine is Bob Dylan's Like a
Rolling Stone which I heard when I was
18 for the first time probably and
that's a song that continues to
rearrange me the first song I liked was
Sugar Sugar by The Archie right right
and I I remember vividly I love I was
like eight years old in
sugar but it it doesn't it didn't
rearrange my Consciousness you know I
mean so that might be the distinction
uh yeah so the so deep stories like one
of the things that's true of the
biblical stories is because they are
they hyperlink with other stories in the
in the biblical Corpus so almost all
their plot lines and characterizations
reflect many other plot lines and
characterizations and so you can delve
into them and never stop and part of the
consequence of that is that if you have
an apprehension of one of the stories
and you can see how it echoes with all
the other things that it that that it
includes it does have that deep
rearranging effect right so one of the
things that deep literature does is it
brings you into harmony with the spirit
of the literature yeah right and that's
akin to that idea that Christ was
brought into harmony with the spirit of
the of the law and the prophets and
partly as a consequence of being
educated in the tradition I mean that
wasn't that wasn't all of it obviously
but you know but and the point you're
making is missed by a lot of biblical
people today because the historical
critical method came so to dominate The
Way We Catholics read the Bible that we
missed that along with lots of other
things but you look for example at 1 and
2 Samuel which I think is one of the
masterpieces of the Old Testament
whoever wrote it we don't know who wrote
it but whoever it was boy did he have
access to the other text because there's
all kinds of the hyperlink stuff all
through it like a phrase from Genesis
suddenly pops up here a phrase from
Leviticus is now over in this part of 2
Samuel so they were well aware of that
so the book is woven together in the
same way that you described something
beautiful and all the parts serve the
whole that's right yeah yeah yeah and
you know your brain is linked like that
too so so the this is actually the case
that in many ways the structure of the
Bible is reflective of the structure of
the brain even at a neurophysiological
level and that makes a certain amount of
sense because the Bible was transmitted
orally and had to arrange itself in a
way that would be remembered so you
would expect a certain concordance but
the brain is arranged so that not every
nerve neuron is in contact with every
other neuron because that would just be
well that would be a total there would
be just a an absolutely undifferentiated
Unity of structure then but that parts
of it are linked to other parts and
parts are separate in a manner that
optimizes both the Simplicity and the
complexity and you you have this exactly
the same thing reflected in the biblical
Corpus so which is also why it's an
inexhaustible book like there's an
infinite number of pathways through it
right so well even that that the beauty
communicating depth not being and not
being exhaustible um I remember the
first time I read a Brave New World ELD
the suckley and it was just it was it
was remarkable because I was also in a
Shakespeare play at the time it was in
college and taking a Shakespeare class
and in the story there's there's a man
he's been separated from the uh the
dystopia and he's out in the wilderness
he's the Savage and at one point he he's
going he's experiencing life he's
experiencing all these emotions he's
experiencing suffering he's experiencing
his love for his mother all these kind
of he's experiencing Injustice but
doesn't have a language for it and then
he comes upon the works of Shakespeare
and it's just like he he even says in
the in the in the in the book it says
that he finally had a language yeah for
the the the hatred he had for this kind
of stepfather figure he finally had a
language for the Injustice that he was
going through and was like yeah cuz
Shakespeare had that that's again it's
Transcendent there's a beauty there that
even the Savage would say this applies
to my life multivalent right right right
right well one of the things I noticed
in my clinical Pro practice when I was
dealing with people who had been
severely traumatized which almost
inevitably meant that they had not only
met with tragedy but with malevolence
because you really need you really need
to run face first into malevolence to be
truly traumatized just tragedy won't do
it that the conversations would
immediately get so deep if we were near
the core of the problem that it was
almost inevitable that the language that
they were using and that I was using
took on like biblical overtones because
that was the only language that we had
at our disposal to be able well if
you're if you've really been hurt like
if you were sexually assaulted by the
uncle that was supposed to take care of
you you know that was trusted by his
sister when you were four you you've
encountered a level of malevolence that
requires a language of Good and Evil
even even to explicate much less to
understand and you know one of the
things you do do to people with people
who have been severely traumatized is
that you bring them into an advanced
philosoph opical or even theological
understanding of the relationship
between good and evil because without
that especially if sometimes people are
traumatized because they've done
malevolent things themselves and then
the only pathway forward for them at all
is to develop a sophisticated
formulation of Good and Evil and that's
almost inevitably in fact it might have
to be inevitably a religious formulation
you know you could even Define a
religious formulation that way is that a
religious formulation is a story that
provides a phisticated representation of
the deepest levels of Good and Evil it's
perfectly good description of religion
infuriates you because it does me when
the the new atheists in that kind of
cavalier manner will just you know toss
the Bible aside Bronze Age mythology you
know oldfashioned pre-scientific
nonsense and what dangerous magic
they're dealing with there I mean
because here's this thing that has
defined Western culture and as you say
undergirds most of our artistic
expressions and tracks with our deepest
psychological
aspirations and needs what what a
tragedy when the Bible is is trash that
way you know yeah well it's a such a
it's a strange combination of utter
oversimplified misinterpretation right
to read the Bible as an uh what would
you say an archaic scientific theory
because it wasn't partly because there
weren't scientific theories 2,000 years
ago we could start with that but then
well seriously you know and then and
then to to insist upon the most
simplistic possible depth less
misreading of the stories uh but then to
throw the baby out of the bathwater on
the moral side is it's it's surprising
you know it's surprising Sam Harris for
example you know Sam partly insists upon
his scientism let's say because Sam
Maybe somewhat uniquely among the new
atheists really did wrestle with the
problem with evil and part of the reason
that he wanted to ground a Morality In
The Objective truth was because he
wanted to develop a morality that was
sufficiently robust that evil could be
properly categorized and then pushed
back against and I I think the problem
with Harris's approach is the kind of
objectivity that he is attempting to
base science on cannot be reconciled
with an with morality itself he's got
his philosophical categories mixed up
badly and and his project has to fail
which and I I think it has so
yeah question number
three father Mike and out of time thank
you all for coming father Mike Go your
work with the Bible and the catechism is
well known for its Evangelical impact on
young people the younger
gener the younger Generations however
are also infamously skeptical of
organized religion and anything like the
existence of Miracles that smacks of
violating their secular conceptions of
science so how can Catholics speak about
the Bible and the miraculous in ways
that young people will find both
attractive and convincing it's good
question what do you think Bishop um
you're on your own kid no I
I so so I think something that's really
fascinating is a lot of times um because
I work on a college campus that a lot of
stuff that I'll do and also gets used in
a lot of high schools or you know Junior
High kind of thing that it it um people
Point people point to the impact it has
on on younger folks which is awesome
incredible the number of people who have
approached me um having gone through the
Bible they always they always begin
their emails or the letters with I know
that you are primarily speaking young
people but I am 85 and you know kind of
thing and uh which I'm really grateful
for I don't know if if you know familiar
with the work of Christian Smith
Christian Smith he's sociologist out of
Chapel Hill originally and then now he's
at Notre Dame and goish he
um he uh wrote a book 15 20 years ago
called uh soul searching where it was
about the spiritual lives of American
adolescence and he and his team they
went out across the country and they did
a survey of the spiritual lives the
faith lives of American Americans who
were raised Jewish raised agnostic
atheist raised Mainline Protestant
Evangelical Catholic and he came to the
conclusion that they all believe the
same thing regard essentially regardless
of how they were raised they all believe
kind of the same general ideas about
life about God about how what they're
called to and he termed it uh moralistic
therapeutic deism and I if you heard
that term but the idea is that that
there's a God and he's good he's not
really necessary in your life you don't
need need to have a relationship with
him unless you are in some kind of
problem in which case he's your on call
therapist slm helicopter parent you know
the best opter parent ever um good
people go to heaven when they die and
basically everyone's good unless you're
Hitler um and and it was this remarkable
thing was just the that was when I was
first getting into youth ministry and
campus ministry and I just was on the
lookout for this because it was a
fascinating kind of depiction and I just
kind of would would see this again and
again but wonder where it came from like
does it come from a simple skepticism
does it come from a a kind of a
postmodern way of looking at the world
does it come from this independence of a
new generation like what is Millennials
now gen
Z there's another scholar at notan who
um asked the
question same question you know for
generations for thousands of years Faith
was passed on through families passed on
through culture and he asked the
question how come the previous
generation failed to pass on the faith
to Millennials to gen Z and his
conclusion was remarkable and his
conclusion I I when when he pointed it
out I was this is true the conclusion
was they didn't fail to pass it
on the conclusion is Boomers and Gen X
xers did pass on their faith they also
are moralistic therapeutic theists that
that that the religion of America not
just the religion of American Youth
religion of America is moralistic and
therapeutic and deistic in that sense of
it's not a Biblical religion and and so
he how do anecdotal evidence now um all
of the many of the emails and letters
I've gotten about the Bible have been
either I'm 85 first time through the
Bible I'm 50 first time through the
Bible been going to mass every Sunday in
my life been Catholic my whole life this
is the first time I've ever encountered
the god of the Bible right I would get
my pastor's version and not nothing no
you know shade against pastors or
against anyone else but this is the
first time I had to come face to face
with God as he has revealed
himself and it's changed my life there's
also been the people who have said
going through the Bible I don't like it
like honestly I remember I I got
recently got an email from a woman I
think she said maybe in her 70s early
70s and she said I'm like I'm on day
five like
what give it a little time give it a
little time on day five and she's like
but there's so much violence that I
never expected there's so much
Brokenness I never expected there so
much disorder that I never expected I
don't know if I can keep pressing
play because why because we are in a
culture we we're all moralistic there
utic deists so I think that the rise of
the nuns which Bishop you've talked
about a ton I think I don't know if
there's a rise of the nuns I think we
simply have the rise of the people who
are unwilling to check the box so we
have generations of Boomers and gen xers
who have checked the Box CU yeah I was
raised Catholic I'm Catholic and now we
have a kind of generation of gen Z and
Millennials who are saying like I don't
want to check the box just for the sake
of checking the box if I don't believe
it like my like my parents and like my
grandparents so I think that we're just
seeing now what's already been there so
I don't know if there's any extra
cynicism or extra skepticism there may
be and this might be a silver lining and
I don't want to jump to the Silver
Lining too quickly there may be just
extra
honesty and this is actually where I'm
standing because I don't have maybe
maybe I don't have the cultural baggage
that I have to check the box maybe I'm
just now free finally to uh tell the
truth I think the point you're raising
is very interesting about because
America has this dual inheritance from
the enlightenment of from the Bible we
have a strong biblical tradition but
also the enlightenment tradition and
deism in its various forms comes out of
the Enlightenment tradition and I think
that's right that a lot of people
Catholics included don't really know the
biblical God who is very strange but but
in forms Augustine and aquinus and our
great people but we've been very
infected by an Enlightenment kind of
rationalistic deistic view you know I'm
always in my more theological moments
fighting against the view that God is as
a being well that's a very deistic you
know rationalistic view that God's the
biggest thing around which is not at all
what our great theologians say and it's
not the biblical idea God's not not the
biggest thing in the world but the
creator of the heavens and the Earth
ipsum acquaint says not enum not highest
being and that's there's a world of
difference there and that biblical God
who was not competing with my freedom
it's like the burning bush the closer
that God gets the more luminous and
beautiful the world becomes he's not in
competition with it cuz the D that God
is finally we're in competition with
it's up there out there and maybe
impinges once in a while but that's not
the Bible that's a kind of perverted
form of a of an Enlightenment view but
America inherited both of those forms
yeah and I think there's an openness an
openness to the miraculous I think
there's what I see with the young people
I work with there's a there's an
openness to the to the fact that God is
present and is active in this world and
they long to see those times so I I I
again when I when I talk about here's
moments where God is interacting with us
they're like yes yeah even if it's on
the level of mere Spirit I'm mere Spirit
but you know if we want evidence you
want material evidence but when there's
even like the oh I recognize God's
presence prove it I can't I can only
point to my experience of him and I
think there's a longing for that go
ahead
well young people tend to be resistant
to the notion of structure and Dogma
first of all because they're young right
and so in some ways they're Inc
competition with the previous structure
and the Dogma as they start to take
their place but also
because one of the things that's
intrinsic in that deism that you
described is the rousan view that
tradition and structure does little else
than interfere with the full flowering
of untrammeled of the Untamed subjective
Hedonism that's the true Freedom let's
say of
self-actualization right and that we're
intrinsic Al good except in so far as
our institutions make us bad and that's
an extraordinarily foolish way to think
and it's extraordinarily
counterproductive because what it leaves
you with is an identity whose freedom is
confused with your subjective whims and
you might say well why shouldn't I be
allowed to just pursue my subjective
whims and the answer to that is that you
won't be any more successful in your
life than an undisciplined 2-year-old
because most of what will be good in
your life is isn't a consequence of you
just getting exactly what you want when
you want it every second but entering
into increasingly sophisticated
sacrificial relationships with other
people in the world so if you get
married for example which is generally a
good idea then you're going to have to
sacrifice a certain degree of your
subjective hedonic whims to the
Integrity of the marriage and with any
luck that will be way better for you
than your own stupid impulses will be
and right over right over multiple
decades right that's part of maturation
and you give up part of yourself to your
family but you receive far more in
return and you give up something of
yourself to your community and to your
tradition and one of the things that
we've done a very bad job of of
educating young people and perhaps even
ourselves about is the need for
Collective ritual and belief and some of
that's to be found in well traditional
the traditional teachings of the church
you know as as flawed as that Pro may
have been but this is something Jonathan
Paso has really helped me understand
more deeply too like we all understand
that maybe it's more fun to go to a
stadium and watch a sports team with
20,000 other people but we haven't
really generalized that to the point
maybe the Evangelical Protestants do
this better some people do understand
that maybe it's better to aim at the
highest good possible with a bunch of
other people because it is in fact
partly a collective Enterprise and that
will also butress your own will and
that's definitely something that the
church can offer but we're fighting the
church is fighting against that
deep-seated notion especially in the
hedonistic atomized liberal West that
all tradition and structure is to be
viewed as nothing but an impediment to
the full flowering of your intrinsically
wonderful subjectivity it's infected
every young person in the in the west
yeah well it's as a point no there was a
was it what is I I I'm sure Bishop you
have a better sense maybe both do of uh
languages but I remember coming across
this that sin our our English term sin
uh comes from the German word
Sund which which means to split Sunder
to Sund put a sunnd right so sin come
etymologically that Sunder and religion
means to bind and so if I don't think
I'm split if I don't think that I've
I've experienced sin if I don't think
that I have any need of like you
mentioned jeano like the noble savage
that that that sense of like I'm fine
just the way I am if I'm not split then
I don't need religion I can I can be
fine with spirituality but if I've been
split then I need something to bind me
together not because it restricts my
freedom but because it makes me whole I
think there's a different well in part
of that binding part of that binding is
found in the hierarchical arrangement of
the community and right and the church
should be occupying a relatively High
position in that hierarchical
Arrangement if it's functioning
optimally and yeah and the it is the
noble savage imagery that's at the
bottom of this and part of the pathology
in that is that so one of the things
that psychologists have discovered even
though they didn't really think it
through all the way and and haven't
understood its full implications is that
there's very little difference between
being self-conscious so let's say
thinking about yourself and being
concerned about yourself or for that
matter even being aware of yourself
those states of being thinking about
yourself being concerned about yourself
being aware of yourself they're
absolutely indistinguishable technically
from negative emotion there's no
difference between being concerned with
yourself and being miserable those are
the same thing in fact one of the things
that being miserable does is make you
self-conscious and so one of the
corollaries of that is that you're
certainly not going to find your way to
the meaning that will sustain you
through life by concentrating only on
what it is that's you and what you want
or what something fractured and broken
and partial and desirous and impulsive
within you once you want to meld that
all together into some form of higher
integration maybe that would
characterize a well- integrated
personality but then beyond that you
weld that into all the different levels
of social Community right which is why
for example you're in service to your
husband or to your wife within the
confines of the marriage and both of you
are in service to your family and that's
all not merely a restriction on your
domain of subjective Freedom that's such
an appalling way to think about it
because that makes your the people
people you love into burdens that do
nothing but get in your way which is not
a favor that you're laying at their feet
instead of opportunities which is really
what they are to find through the love
you have for them a much higher
expression of yourself than you'd ever
manage in any way if you were only
concentrating on what you or something
in you wants right now and we've done a
very very bad job and this is certainly
true of the psychological community of
pointing out the relationship between
harmonious existence let's say in
relationship to being which is more
which is a better definition of mental
health we've done a poor job of pointing
out the relationship between that and
the adoption of these higher order forms
of social responsibility and that's
that's probably even to some degree
that's a consequence of of Enlightenment
influences and its stress on
individuality in the west but also
characteristic of a kind of consumerist
heathenism that's also part parcel of a
modernistic materialistic Society you
know and it's good to have good things
and all that to live life more abundant
in the material sense but if all you're
after is the next bout of material
gratification you're going to be a
never-ending cycle of well what what
desperate pursuit of something like
infantile satiation which isn't going to
satisfy you anyways I wonder Jordan do
you find this that the religious people
themselves in the course of my lifetime
lost confidence in themselves I mean the
religious leaders that we felt the
program was to kind of justify ourselves
to Skeptics and you know well we got try
to explain to the Skeptics of religion
but in fact look we're the we're the
keepers of this great tradition of value
that's given meaning to to Western
society and individual lives for for
Millennia we shouldn't be ringing our
hands I mean we should be proposing
confidently to the society the good the
true and the Beautiful in their final
link to the Supreme good true and
beautiful that's God and that's your
point which I really like about religion
reare to link back so all these things
have fallen apart for different reasons
and it's a sort of preening
self-regarding you know existentialism
that would say I invent value that's a
road to disaster and the church's job it
seems to me is to propose to especially
young people here's this world of value
look how wonderful that look how rich
that is and get out of yourself I I
think that's right when we're what did
Augustine call Sin incurvatus Inay right
when you're caved in on yourself it's a
beautiful definition of sin get out of
that get out of that little Bor ing
space of your own will and what I can
figure out and what I'm going to do I
mean bore me to death with that is show
show people the realm of objective value
leading finally to God but I think it
we're at fault in a way we religious
people because we started in this hand
ringing routine and you know we should
boldly go out I always like the assault
of the luciferian in intellects
fundamentally and that's in in some
sense the negative part of the
Enlightenment spirit it's it's not
surprising that it put everybody back on
their heels including the more
classically religious types because
untangling the sometimes apparently
paradoxical relationship between the
scientific method and the claims of
religious tradition is a very
challenging intellectual Enterprise and
it's easy to fall prey to the notion
that and this is an Enlightenment notion
that all the judeo-christian tradition
was was something like poorly formulated
proto-scientific theories that we've now
dispensed with and the thing is there
there's a tiny element of that that's
kind of true but unless you can separate
the wheat from the chaff I'm going to
mix metaphor is terribly here you throw
the baby out you throw the baby out with
the bath water and in this case it's the
Holy Infant that you throw out and
that's a very bad idea right right right
right I got three metaphors in there
yeah but there is there seems to be you
know the the Highlight we get the idea
concept of the individual and individual
dignity from the judeo-christian
tradition we also get this but but what
that's introduced how it's introduced
into a family so here's Abraham and his
family so he's called but he's not
called by himself he's called with Sarah
and become from them comes what not just
those two and they drift off in the
sunset from them there comes Isaac and
from that comes this bigger family
bigger family so we have this double
necessity of the individual and the
sanctity of the individual and the
sanctity of the family so talking about
like the levels that we have to be bound
in such a fractured and atomized world
where I mean think about the the Tik
toks and the reals of like I'm alone and
I just get to live for myself I got to
get up whenever I wanted today and my
cat and we're happy together but but
there's no one makes demands on me and
I'm the happiest I've ever been and you
think like but that's that's the
opposite because we need family we need
friendship and we need this body of
Christ I mean it goes from the smallest
to the greatest we possibly could well
the ab Abraham reference there I think
is particularly apropo because what
happens in the Abraham story is that
Abraham is living a life of infantile
satiation at the beginning of the story
right because he's 70 years old or
thereabouts and he's has Rich parents
and he has everything that you could
need materially at hand so there's
actually no reason for him to do
anything and so that's like the
Socialist Utopia has actually come to
bear fruit in some way but then this
voice comes to him that announces itself
more or less as the voice of the
ancestors right of the voice of
tradition and says to go have the
adventure and it's quite a brutal
Adventure like your life will be you
know I Abraham encounters famine and
totalitarianism and the necessity of
sacrificing his son and War and and and
terrible conflict between his kin
members and um and and and fractious
relationships within his own family he
has the whole catastrophe of life but he
has this glorious adventure and he makes
the proper sacrifices along the way and
it is very telling that even though the
abrahamic story is an adventure story
it's one that integrates his wife and
his family along with it you know it's
as if you went and saw a James Bond
movie and when James Bond is going
around the world the romantic adventure
he has is one with his wife and the
children come along for the ride right
and but that's well that's a sign of an
integrated life but it doesn't mean it's
not an adventure it means it's the
proper
adventure and he heard the higher voice
I think that's the key thing with
that we we're built to hear the higher
voice not just listen to our own little
puny voice but to hear finally the voice
of the unconditioned of God and what
went wrong is so Adam and Eve stopped
listening to God and that's when all the
sundering takes place and then Along
Comes Abraham who finally hears the
voice and then watch that theme
throughout the Bible whether it's Jonah
or people that hear the voice that's
still the game it seems to me you know
the voice coming from Heaven is a symbol
for this this openness to the
unconditioned to the good the true and
the Beautiful that lie beyond the
categorical and that calls out to us
that claims me and sends me on a mission
I totally get that that's exactly the
right description of what makes life
worth living right well that's the
that's the part of life that is worth
living beckoning yeah right that that
higher call but I would all tell me what
you think about this so you you you know
you talk about you're pointing I suppose
for young people and and older people as
well to where they might search for The
Voice or the appearance of God and
you're suggesting that one of those
places in what's in what's beautiful and
that's reminiscent for me of moses'
Encounter of the burning with the
burning bush which is something that
calls to him which he goes to
investigate that's a pathway to God what
you see with Elijah is that that pathway
to God isn't so much something that
beckons in his situation it's more
something that that
imposes Transcendent limits and so
Elijah is the first prophet who firmly
he he he he he engages in combat against
Bal who's a nature God you can think of
nature the nature God is very similar to
the Gaia that the environmentalists
worship right it's the projection of
what's of the highest value into the
natural world and so even if the
environmentalists claim that they're not
deistic doesn't matter they have an
implicit di deism that Associates the
highest good with the natural world and
it's a powerful argument because and
this is what Elijah contends with
because if you're in a thunderstorm or a
hurricane or you experience an
earthquake or a volcano or you look up
at the Heavenly Skies you can feel a
sense of awe and you can feel that
there's something Beyond you that's
let's say embedded in the mysteries of
the world and it's easy to confuse that
with God now what Elijah realizes and
this is his famous statement is that
he's in a cave and he experiences a
number of powerful manifestations of the
natural world this is after he's
defeated the prophets of Bal and he
hears the still Small Voice called to
him within and that's really that's not
even so much the voice that calls to
Adventure or beauty which is part of
that it's conscience per se and this is
another place that people can look for
God you know and it's it's it's it's a
rough search in some ways you know God
at least in part is the spirit that
wakes you up in 3 in at 3: in the
morning when You' violated a higher part
of yourself and calls you on your
misbehavior and you might say well why
would you associate that with a
Transcendent spirit and let's say with
God and part of the answer to that is
try controlling it right or try
convincing it that it doesn't have a
point which is what you're going to be
doing desperately at 3: in the morning
when you'd rather let yourself off the
hook for your stupidity but something
within you absolutely refuses to allow
you to do that and it's something that
you can't control and so since it since
it calls you on your misbehavior and you
can't control it I would say that the
impetus is on the atheistic types to
account for its phenomenology it's like
well it's a spirit it has autonomy seems
to have a voice it calls you out your
misbehavior so it has a moral it knows
you completely even better than you know
yourself rightly why that's why John
Henry Newman took that as the best
argument for God's existence he felt
that after Hume the more cosmological
arguments were suspect so he went in the
typical modern way inside but found that
path cuz I would say it's the it's the
unconditioned good that is is summoning
you to to goodness right and it does you
by by it does that in part by calling
you out on your misbehavior too right
that's the part of God that's the judge
rather than the invitation the
Aboriginal Vicor of Christ in the soul
Newman calls the conscience which is a
marvelous description right even before
the pope is the Vicor of Christ the the
conscience is the Aboriginal Vicor of
Christ in the soul so so so you might
ask yourself why would why would the
would conscience be associated with
Christ in the soul and so you could
imagine this so one of the implicit
messages of the story of the Christian
passion is that you're called upon to
sacrifice everything in the pursuit of
what's highest right absolutely
everything which is why Christ's passion
is a story of the confrontation with the
most miserable possible death and also
with the deepest reaches of malevolence
right so so so and the the implication
of the story is that the existence of
those two things that you're called upon
to act in the most positive manner and
so then if you're sinning you're
violating that pattern of action and the
conscience is what calls you on the
violation of that sacrificial
relationship and that's why there's an
association between the conscience and
Christ in the soul right because you're
not what the conscience tells you is
that you are not being sufficiently what
would you say you're you're not being
sufficiently sufficiently religious in
your sacrifices that's exactly what
you're being called upon and you might
think well I don't want to give that up
it's like well yeah you don't want to
but that's not the point is that if
you're going to pursue what is truly
highest you have to give up everything
that's lowest and if you don't pursue
what's highest and give up what's lowest
then life will arrange itself against
you very rapidly and that you can just
think about that practically it's like
if you conducted yourself so that you
took the Lesser victory over the greater
Victory and you did that constantly then
you would lose it's the definition of
losing and what your conscience does is
inform you when you're losing even in
ways that you would rather not admit
right and so there there is no
difference between that the call to the
highest sacrifice Jonah heard the voice
of his conscience and then didn't follow
it right right follow that is disaster
for you and for the people around you
right right so it's not just the private
thing oh boy I did something wrong it's
going to really hurt me it'll hurt
people around you yeah worse even maybe
well I mean if you miss behave when
you're a child if you misbehave and this
might even be true when you're an adult
when your parents are still around it
isn't obvious at all that your
misbehavior hurts you more than it hurts
your parents right and and in
totalitarian States there's a good
example of this a totalitarian state is
a state where every single person is
lying about absolutely everything all
the time and so each person lies in the
moment to protect themselves against the
consequences of the truth at least
momentarily
they pretend to believe things that they
don't what the Soviets used to joke we
pretend to work and they pretend to pay
us it's like yeah that's a great Russian
joke that is and that leads right to
unbelievable poverty and misery and you
know every person who's rationalized
lying in the system is saying well I
have to lie because the consequences of
telling the truth will be so great but
the cumulative consequence of those
individual lies is literally that
everyone lives in hell and so one of the
things your conscience tells you and it
really tells you this is when you lie
you are moving towards hell and not just
for you but for everyone around you
everyone you love and all your
descendants and like it's a terrible
thing that swallow up your errant will
and spit you out exactly where you're
supposed to be so the whale there the
fish is not a negative thing it's
swallowing up this errant will of Jonah
and then confining it so it needed
confining it needed restriction but then
it spits them up needed the suffering
Poss it needed the suffering right and
then spits him up exactly where he's
supposed to be and so like how do we
read times of depression and Times of of
deep Darkness you day profundus you from
the depths I cry to you lord well good
it might be a depth imposed upon you by
God to limit this errant will but then
God will take you where you don't want
to go where he wants you to go and and
to what end is you know to what end I
think it goes back in so many ways um
because he wants you to be like him yeah
because there's that sense of like okay
I'm going to give you these gifts give
you and and and this burden why because
in bearing this burden well you'll
become like me that's one I think why
one of the reasons Jesus says if you
want to be my disciple deny yourself
pick up your cross and follow me say do
this do this whatever the burden
whatever that cross is I'm not far from
you I'm here I'm doing something in you
and in doing so you become like me even
if you have to go through hell like
there's even that process even though
you will have to go through you'll
unleash tremendous is good so Jonah
becomes the greatest Prophet ever
Nineveh is converted from top to bottom
and even the cattle put on
sacko he's like the most he's the most
powerful Prophet ever because he finally
cooperated with the the voice of his
conscience right well and and part of
the problem that you have to wrestle
with too is a time frame problem so in
the story of job job is punished
unjustly and and and and that's part of
the pain of the story like Christ is
punished unjustly and and that's part of
what we have to wrestle with with as we
say pass through the world is that the
there are times when we'll have be
called upon to Bear suffering for the
sake of the good you might say and part
of that's the necessary consequence of
things unfolding in their appropriate
time and that's something that perhaps
you have to have faith in and it's a
very difficult thing to to justify I
mean part of the reason you want to lie
is because you want to get away with
what you did right now so that there are
no consequences or that you can gain
should gain some Advantage right that's
why people lie
and so then you might say well you'll
pay a price for telling the truth and
it's you know it's it's definitely the
case that you will my experience with
that has been that if I say something
that's true but that's unpopular there
can be a vicious firestorm in the
aftermath but if I Stand My Ground then
that Firestorm exhausts itself and the
situation reverses so that what were
negative consequences to begin with
become the consequences that were much
better than I could have possibly
imagined before that occur Ur and you
see that in the story of job now It's
tricky because you know you don't want
to justify your suffering by the fact
that when you emerge through it things
are better because that's too easily
transformed into a post ha talk
justification of the production of
suffering that's not exactly the point
the point is sometimes you have to
withstand in order for the higher good
to make itself manifest in its proper
time and things do have a proper time
and part of faith is that what's good
will unfold if it's given the proper
time right you may be called upon to
bear that and then you might ask
yourself too is like well why do you
have to bear a burden at all in order to
develop and and maybe that's a
fundamental mystery in in its Essence
but you can ask yourself in your own
life it's like part of the reason
sometimes that you have to suffer in
order to develop is because you're so
damn stubborn and you won't give up your
foolishness when you could have and so
like the Pharaoh you double down and the
suffering intensifies but some of the
time too you have to think that you
wouldn't be as sophisticated and
welldeveloped as you are in your best
sense if you wouldn't have gone through
the difficult times that demanded from
you that level of development you know
and when you're trying to nurture a
child you don't protect them from
everything that challenges them you put
them in a in a in a ring of combat let's
say where they're optimally challenged
so the best in them can reveal itself
and we none of us know how much
challenged we have to be offered in the
world in order to be highly motivated
enough so the best within us will r
itself know if you abjured all sin you'd
suffer the least amount possible but
perhaps that still wouldn't be
[Music]
none